---
templateKey: blog-post
title: "Coronavirus and Strategic Risk: Now is NOT the time to be worried (that
  was 1-2 years ago)"
date: 2020-03-02T20:16:46.010Z
description: No it's not
featuredpost: true
---
I’ve been following the spread of the coronavirus with intense interest, for two reasons. First, I’m travelling to Africa this summer and if a global pandemic hits, the fragile health systems in many African countries would be overwhelmed. Second, I’m amazed at how many companies have been caught flat-footed, among them two tech giants Amazon and Apple. Their responses appear to me as reacting to a potential situation rather than proactively implementing crisis plans. Flat-footed seems to be a common response, as typified by the language of a Wells Fargo report in the last week: “We believe the time to start worrying about the supply chain risk \[of coronavirus] is here.”

Wells couldn’t be more wrong! If you’re a business leader and are just now worrying about Coronavirus and pandemic risk, you are way behind the curve. The best and brightest businesses are implementing early pandemic protocols that will help them preserve key relationships with stakeholders, gain short and long term market share, and enhance profitability. The time to proactively worry about pandemics was 18-24 months ago; today no one’s worried, they’re trashing about looking for solutions.

In this post, I’ll lay out the strategic risk that arises from pandemics, and then provide some suggestions about how your organization can prepare for next time this threat arises.

**Pandemic as strategic risk: It’s not if, but when.**

Many in the media are convinced that Coronavirus (technically known as COVID-19) will become a pandemic. If so, then we’re already locked in to crisis planning, and if not, we’ve dodged a bullet, this time. The uncomfortable reality is that the question of a pandemic is not an “if”, it’s a “when.” There are four major reasons why I hold this view.

1. *More toxic bugs*. As medicine has gotten better over the last century, we’ve eliminated or mitigated the impact of the mild to moderate bacteria and viruses. Common bacteria can be killed with Antibiotics and we can now vaccinate against many viruses. What we’re now threatened by now tend to be new, and highly virulent bugs that hit humans hard and we have no natural or man-made defenses against.
2. *Convenient breeding grounds.* The lack of sanitation in many, many markets around the world. Open air markets that sell freshly killed animals, with blood and other breeding grounds for toxic bugs, have always existed, and that’s not the problem. It’s myopic and silly to think of this as a “Chinese Virus,” it could easily have come from major parts of Africa, the Middle East, other impoverished Asian nations, and even some places in Latin America. So, it’s not a geography issue, the problem in point #1. The viruses that do make the jump from animals to humans are ones we have no defenses against.
3. *Time lags.* Viruses become pandemics because of two critical, and biologically and social hardwired, time lags. First, there is a lag between infection and onset of symptoms; second, the lag between the onset of symptoms in enough people for the medical community to realize that a new pathogen has arrived on the scene. These lags mean that the infection can be transmitted to many, many others before anyone realizes there’s a real problem. COVID-19 has a very nasty property, “asymptomatic transmission” or the ability for an infected person to pass the virus to other before they become sick. The response of officials in Wuhan certainly exacerbated these time lags—and every day counts when dealing with a disease that transfers at a multiplicative rate, but there is a structural window for a disease to spread before it gets on anyone’s radar screen.
4. *Global integration.* In a more genteel age, we had epidemics, or sickness that impacted a lot of people in a limited area. Now we have pandemics (the prefix pan means “all”), or infections that impact lots of people in lots of places. Global travel means that infected, but not sick, people move rapidly from place to place, and the pathogens go global quickly.

Given that a pandemic, either COVID-19 or some future one, is inevitable, let’s think about the strategic risks they pose to organizations.

**Pandemic risk affects competitive advantage, not just supply chains.**

The defining characteristic of strategic risks is their ability to impact, for better or worse, the basic source of a company’s competitive, strategic advantage. With COVID-19, the focus is on operational risk, how to keep the supply chain active and how to survive the crisis. If COVID-19 turns into a real pandemic, then there will be firms that are strategic losers (they’ll lose market share, profits, and maybe go bankrupt), and winners (they’ll gain market share, brand equity, and improve profits).

A basic tenet of strategy is that firms win in their markets by some combination of cost leadership (think of Walmart and its ability to translate low costs into low prices), or some type of differentiation that increases the price customers are willing to pay for the product (think of Apple’s $1,000 iPhones). Here are some key risks that people think of as operational ones, but have deep implications for competitive advantage. We can see this for both cost leaders and those focused on differentiation.

1. *Supply Chain Risk*—Inventory stock-outs of both products and key inputs are the pressing operational concern, but the strategic impact of supply chain disruption come through losing economies of scale or scope, or substituting key components with lower quality alternatives of key components that destroys differentiation. The strategic result is the loss of short term sales and longer term market share to better-prepared competitors.
2. *Brand Risk*—brands are more than logos, they are the emotional connection between a customer and company that communicate a commitment to low costs or a differentiated product. Nothing threatens that emotional connection than the loss of trust between the company and its stakeholders. Companies need an effective crisis communication plan to maintain trust (we are taking every precaution) and dispel rumors (you can get coronavirus from an iPhone made in China). Brand managers have work overtime during a crisis to maintain open and positive marketing communications, and the quality of those communications suffers the more hastily they are thrown together.
3. *Financial Risk*—A pandemic favors those with inventory on hand, or excess production capacity. That slack costs money, in real cash flow, but also by tying up money that could finance other projects, cap ex or operating ones. Slack in the system provides strategic insurance, but the premium comes out of current earnings. The hit to the bottom line may be smaller and longer than the spikes in performance during a crisis, but the impact will be there nonetheless.
4. *Pricing Risk*—If a company has to raise prices to compensate for higher costs, or to dampen demand, how and when will it be done? Will customers see price increases and gouging or profiteering, or a rational, and hopefully temporary, response to market conditions? What are the implications for the P&L from a pandemic, measured in revenue losses? Price increases hit cost leaders hard, but even differentiators find that price increases may exceed customer perceptions of value.
5. *Human Capital Risk*—What happens to our people in a pandemic? As I was writing this post, I received an email from my state health department about how to manage employee risk if COVID-19 turns pandemic. It was a list of questions I’d been thinking about: To the extent that competitive advantage relies on worker productivity and knowledge contributions, how will a company’s response in a pandemic help or hinder productivity? Do they have plans and infrastructure in place to facilitate distance work? What about manufacturing? How and when do we close facilities to ensure safety and maintain the loyalty of the workforce? Will we pay our workforce even if they are quarantined.

**Preparing for pandemic risk**

When companies think about how to prepare for pandemic risk, they need to think short term (thanks for COVID-19) and longer term (for the next pandemic). The first thing to do is to avoid the natural tendency among individuals and teams to collectively express a sigh of relief when the current crisis ends, assume that the current crisis was a singular, one-off even, and assume that all will be well in the future. I’ll suggest two ways to prepare for pandemic risk: actively learning from the current crisis, and using a wargame exercise to plan for the next one.

1. *Learn through after action reports*. The US Military learned that best way to improve battlefield performance was to engage in a systematic review of what happened in the last battle, with no attempt to place blame on individuals or units. Responding to COVID-19 requires action, and if a team is just beginning to act, a lot of reaction. Mistakes will happen, but remember that mistakes are how individuals and organizations learn. Conduct after action reviews at the end of each week for now. Figure out what to do differently next week to improve. Look at competitors and aspirational companies to see what they do. Identify best practices, and common mistakes to avoid.
2. *Wargame the future.* Wargaming is a powerful tool that allows executive teams to engage in a simulated crisis (a war game). This helps them better understand two critical things: how the DNA of the company would drive a default solution, and where that default causes problems as the wargame plays out. A good wargame pits your company—or a function inside it—against a competitor, a regulator, or another internal division. Played out over several rounds and a 2-3 days, wargames allow teams to see how their actions play out in a larger context, and helps teams realize mental blind spots or automatic responses that at best don’t help and at worst exacerbate crises.

A real pandemic, wither COVID-19 or some other pathogen in the future, represents a strategic risk: It will torpedo some strategies and turbocharge others. Which outcome would you prefer? If you want to avoid torpedoes and identify turbochargers, Strategic Risk Insights can help your company assess its pandemic risk exposure, serve as guides in navigating the current situation, and facilitate a series of wargames to better prepare for the next pandemic risk.

I’d love to hear from you to learn what your company is doing. You can either leave a comment below, and email me at [paul_godfrey@strategicriskinsights.com](mailto:Paul_Godfrey@byu.edu) and tell me your company’s story.